# Sablefish-MSE

## Development of a Closed Loop Simulation Model to Explore HCRs for Alaska Sablefish

During the 2022 NPFMC stock assessment-management cycle for sablefish, scientists, stakeholders, and managers all voiced interest in exploring new management approaches. Both the NPFMC and SSC recommended exploring tradeoffs among “maximum sustainable yield vs. maximum economic yield reference points, the relative value of stable versus variable catch levels, economic impacts of spatial apportionment, and economically optimal fish size/age considerations”. Given these requests and the potential issues associated with using the F40% HCR for sablefish, this project aims to demonstrate the potential benefits of alternate HCRs (e.g., inventory management strategies) and spawning metrics for sablefish management through closed loop simulation analysis.


### Summary

Alaskan sablefish (Anoplopoma fimbria) are currently managed using the North Pacific Fishery Management Council’s (NPFMC) F40% harvest control rule (HCR). However, sablefish are a long-lived, relatively slow growing species and generic HCRs aimed at maximizing yearly harvest (e.g., spawner-per-recruit, SPR, based maximum sustainable yield proxies) may not perform adequately for achieving key conservation and fishery performance metrics (e.g., maintaining a robust age structure and maximizing long-term fishery yield). To address scientific and stakeholder concerns regarding the robustness of the current HCR for sablefish, a closed loop simulation tool will be developed and implemented to test the efficacy and robustness of current and alternate HCRs as well as spawning metrics through management strategy evaluation (MSE). The aim of the study will be to identify HCRs that can achieve both conservation and economic priorities. Stakeholder engagement and participatory modeling initiatives with industry and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) will be utilized to ensure the suite of HCRs and associated performance metrics address the concerns of constituents in the NPFMC process. The simulation tool will be developed in Template Model Builder (TMB) and modified from an existing code base for sablefish and other NPFMC managed species (see the project GitHub). Although tailored for sablefish, it is expected that the results will be of wide interest to the NPFMC, and the resulting modeling framework will be adapted in the future for similar species in the North Pacific. The conclusions of this study will be presented to the NPFMC and the Science and Statistical Committee (SSC), and are expected to directly influence management decision-making, including the choice of future sablefish HCRs.


### Methods and Study Design

The project will use a management strategy evaluation (MSE) framework, which incorporates closed loop simulations and feedback control, to enable testing the efficacy of management options across an array of fishery, biological, and management uncertainties or assumed future dynamics. By incorporating a range of summary statistics measuring management procedure performance, MSE frameworks are also able to quantitatively compare tradeoffs across a range of conservation and fishery utilization performance metrics. The model will be developed in TMB based on an existing code base for sablefish and other NPFMC managed species (see GitHub Page). The operating model (OM) will be tailored and conditioned on sablefish data and population dynamics to emulate the data quality and quantity currently available for sablefish, while also providing realistic long-term dynamics that might be expected for sablefish (e.g., near-term declines in productivity with spasmodic increases based on a 10 - 20 year cycle; Figure 1).

The primary goal will be to explore the efficacy of the current NPFMC Tier 3 F40% HCR for maintaining long-term conservation and economic goals, given the spasmodic nature of sablefish productivity dynamics. Alternate HCRs will also be implemented and tested (e.g., inventory management strategies and and other HCRs that have been identified for spasmodic stocks; Roel and De Oliveira, 2007; Needle, 2016) as well as alternate metrics of spawning biomass (e.g. including only fully mature age classes in determination of SSB). The covey of management procedures (i.e., the combination of assessment method and resulting management based on a given HCR) will then be compared based on tradeoffs in performance metrics using MSE best practices (e.g., Punt et al., 2016). An array of performance metrics will be incorporated including: maximizing long-term harvest; minimizing the risk of growth or recruitment overfishing; ability to maintain a diverse age structure and spawning portfolio; minimization of catch variation; maximizing profit; maintaining biomass at sustainable levels; maximizing catch of large fish. 

Although the study will utilize a research-oriented ‘desktop MSE’ approach, a participatory modeling framework will be incorporated to elicit input and feedback from primary sablefish stakeholders and managers (Goethel et al., 2018, 2022b). Initially, conservation and fishery objectives as well as HCRs will be established by the principal investigators to determine quantifiable performance metrics and parametrize the models. Metrics and HCRs will then be iteratively updated based on consultation with stakeholders throughout the development of the MSE. Similarly, results will be presented to stakeholders as they become available and feedback elicited regarding model realism, the ability to implement a given HCR, and the appropriateness of performance metrics. Communication, iterative model development, and stakeholder engagement are all viewed as essential to the MSE development process and long-term success of the study.
